This video is made possible by brilliance.
You'll learn more about brilliant later in today's video,
but if you'd like to get started with 'em right now, you can go to
brilliant.org/biographics. You'll also find a link in the description below
At the Dawn of the 20th century.
One young doctor in Vienna developed a theory that would change our
understanding of the human minds forever using cutting edge techniques.
That doctor delved further into the psyche than anyone had before he created
names like the it and super ego that are still in use today,
he cuts along patterns of thinking like transference in the EDUs complex that
still influence over a century later.
Even now his name is still instantly recognizable and it is of course,
SIG Freud born in the mid 19th century.
And what was then the Austrian em empire Freud's life was that a consummate
outsider.
He was an ethnic Jew in a city full of Catholics,
an atheist in a community of practicing Jews in a time of the intense
conservatism. He preached that everyone was bisexual and shocked society.
When he suggested that erotic desire was rooted in childhood trauma.
The father of psychoanalysis,
the inspiration for surrealism and a Maverick who courted controversy,
Freud usher in our modern notion of the minds. Yet he died in exile,
persecuted and loathed by the city that had dedicated his life to.
If you were to leave Vienna ands walk, do north for 150 miles,
you would eventually come to a little town called preborn a small,
somewhat pretty place.
Preborn is utterly unremarkable among Czech towns in almost every respect
with one exception. It was here on may the sixth, 1856.
That Sigman Freud was born at that time.
Pre-born was heavily Catholic town in the Austrian empire with the German name
of Fryberg and it had a Jewish community so tiny that you could count its
members on just one hand,
but small did persecuted Freud managed to be born at a fortuitous time for Jews
in the Austrian empire. Just a few years before the new emperor, France,
Joseph SIIT decreed that the law would stop persecuting.
Other religions no longer would the Empire's Jewish inhabitants be subject to
ghettos and restrictions.
They would be free even to live unrestricted in the Imperial capital of Vienna.
The not that the Freud's immediately took advantage of this, right?
The first few years of Freud's life were passed in the pleasant dullness of pre
Bo dullness that nonetheless masked an eccentric upbringing Freud's father Jacob
was by now on his second marriage and his mother, Emily was 20 years.
Jacob's ju app. One consequence of this was that by the time Freud was born,
he already had a nephew who was a year older than him.
John was Freud's first great friendship as toddlers. The two were inseparable,
but as Freud later remark,
they were also rivals that model of an intimate male friendship.
That was also overshadowed by great rivalry would be one that repeated itself
throughout Freud's life.
In 1859 Freud's older half brother took John and moved away to Manchester in
England.
At first Freud tried to fill the hole of John's fr ship by becoming unhealthily
close to his mother that while Emily doted on her boy,
she was also now heavily pregnant.
Needless to say that subsequent,
glad of four girls and two boy is vying for Emily's attention would make young
Freud crazy jealous that same year, 1859 Jacob's business collapsed.
And he moved the family to Lipsig, but things were no better.
INAX andan in 1860,
the Freud's joins the mass influx of Jews from across the Austrian embar,
moving into vie. The Austria capital of a deeply conservative monarchy vie.
1860 was a European power center,
but one with a bit of a dull reputation,
it was the Dowdy sister of elegance Paris and industrious London.
Yet it was also a capital on the cusp of change as Jewish intellectuals,
Hungarian, a Toras and German artists all converged on the city.
The seeds were planted for Vienna's transformation.
The key figures in that transformation. Well, that would be Sigman Freud.
The family's early years in Vienna. They are much to remark upon.
They're settled into Leo, Paul start, and Jacob presumably got a decent job.
We can infer this because in 80 65,
he was able to pay for nine year old Freud to attend an excellent gymnasium.
And no, no,
not that sort of gymnasium gymnasium is this central European term for a
specialist school. During his years of this OUS,
gymnasium Freud excelled at academic subjects developed a voracious appetite for
books and had yet another of his trademark intimate Fren ships this time with a
lat named Edward,
yet it wasn't until his last year there that Freud made a casual decision that
would change his life.
A public reading know one of G his nature essays was being staged in the young
Freud. He went along on a whim.
It was while listening to this essay that Freud had a flash of inspiration.
He now knew what he wanted to do with his life. He was going to study medicine.
The next decade cast in a blur in 1873 Freud enrolled at the university of
Vienna as a medical students,
where he gained a solid reputation as a brain atomist it was while at university
that he was introduced to the older Dr.
Joseph Broyer a guy who was going to become really important to our story really
soon, two years later in 1875,
Freud traveled to England for the first time meeting up with his old fr John on,
he returns to Vienna, obsessed with Britain,
despite as he put it all the fog and rain, drunkenness,
and conservatism by 1881, Freud was a qualified medical practitioner.
Burley was the ink dry on his degree that had met him,
fallen in love with his future wife, Martha BES. So,
I mean was a fairly busy decade. BES and Freud were soon engaged,
but there was a bit of a problem.
Martha benets came from a highly respected family.
Her grandfather had been the chief rabbi of Hamburg and her parents.
They were used to the finer things. So in this semi impoverished,
one of the doctor came and asked for their daughter's hand in marriage.
They were all like, no, dude,
come back when he got a decent job and you weren't dressed like a hobo. Okay.
And so Freud found himself in 1982,
suddenly in desperate need of a steady income for a Vietnamese medical students.
At that time,
the best way to get ahead was to do something grounds break and get noticed.
And then you could use that fame to set up a practice.
While Freud already had reputation as a brain expert,
he had nothing on his CV that was guaranteed to make his name.
So Freud decided to roll everything on a gamble that couldn't fail.
He was going to introduce Vienna to cocaine.
Now I promised we haven't got confused and accidentally started reading the
Pablo Escobar script on this one.
Freud was actually really certain that a breakthrough with cocaine was where his
future fame and money to marry Martha Lei in April of 1884.
He bought a huge quantity of it and began experimenting with it as a cure for
depression, for indigestion, for alcoholism, you know, anything that might work.
Unfortunately he missed the one age breakthrough that cocaine could have
afforded him. It was Freud's friend, Carl Coller,
who discovered that it could be used to numb people's eyes prior to surgery.
By the time that year had passed. Freud's great. Faray into cocaine,
had gotten him nothing but missed opportunities and an expensive addiction.
So well,
he decided to change tack then July Freud left Vienna and traveled to Paris to
study under the great neurologist Jean,
a Chaco for most of the 19th century nervous disorders had been approached from
a biological perspective, like fixing a leaky ship.
If you could discover where the fault was in patch,
you'd have a halt person again, where others would talk about surgery.
Chaco was interested in hypnosis where doctors in Vienna might whisper about
brain structure.
Chaco was da with healing patients using only the power of words for Freud
witnessing Chacos methods was more minds blowing than a nose full of uncle
Escobar's marching powder Freud returned to Vienna in 1886.
Certain Chacos methods would give him an edge in his competitive field.
At first it looked like another fail.
Freud's contemporaries basically accused him of falling for a load of French
melt, but Freud, he was determined.
He sat up his own practice consulting on nervous diseases using hypnosis.
And soon he had a regular enough income to be able to afford marriage on
September the 13th, 1886 Sigman Freud,
Martha BES were wet over the next 80 years.
The Bunn would produce six children for Freud.
Marrying Martha must have felt like the affirmation that he had been waiting for
here.
He was after all those false starts owner of a successful practice and married
to the woman of his dreams, but Freud wasn't content to just stop. Now,
he'd gotten a taste for grandiose ideas and for eccentric innovations.
His next one. Well, it would change medicine forever.
Come. The mid 1890s Freud was restless.
He had been practicing his brand of psychotherapy for nearly 10 years now and
was no longer getting the results he desired.
It was while in this despondent mood that he got talking with his old teacher,
Dr. Yo bro, during the conversation, bro,
just so happens to mention some of his old cases. Way back in 1882,
bro had treated a woman called Anna O Anna had been suffering from what used to
be called hysteria.
A casual term 19th century doctors used to mean anything from seizures to ANGs
anxiety, to being too unladylike. But Anna had also been strong-willed.
She shrugged off Brewer's attempts to use hypnosis and suggested they work for
talking over the next few weeks.
Patient and doctor developed something that they called the talking cure instead
of Bri using hypnosis to implant suggestions,
HYP just allowed Anna to unburden herself a kind a cathartic release.
The idea that you could use talking to get it hidden trauma was the craziest
thing that Freud had heard since his days with Chaco and well
naturally he loved it in 1895.
He helped brewer write a case study that they published together as studio Uber
hysteria. However,
brewer was uncomfortable with Freud's obsess with his case does by what he
claims, bro, hadn't actually cured. Anna.
She was still in decline and today had thought unlikely that Bruce's treatment
was helpful. Still Freud persisted.
He began introducing the talking method to his own practice.
He invented the classic psychoanalyst set up that we know from the movies,
you know,
with the patients lying on a comfortable couch while the doctors had out of
sight taking notes,
pretty soon Freud was using free association to get his Bour patients to talk
about their darkest desires.
And he kept finding out that they were all obsessed with sex.
So this is where we get to the first of many controversial parts of Freud's
work. All of Freud's patients, they were female. And it's a frequent accusation.
That Freud was simply pathologizing, ordinary female sexuality,
whether or not that's true Freud soon came to believe that our hidden desires
were at the root of many of our problems before long he'd coined a term for the
process of treating these problems. And that was psychoanalysis.
But if you're expecting to hear that this is the beginning of Freud's rides to
becoming a household name. Well, you might have to think again for a Freud,
the late 1890s were spent in the intellectual wilderness. Sure.
Things very okay. Financially and his home life was going fine.
Martha had just given birth to their youngest daughter,
the future child therapist, and a Freud, but Freud's reputation.
It was floundering his initial attempts to create a handbook for psychoanalysis.
They collapsed among the Catholic establishments.
There were R that Freud was wasting time with some Jewish science. Once again,
Freud was in need of a breakthrough to put his name in the spotlight in 1897,
he found it up until that point. Freud had listened.
As many of his patients described what appeared to be sexual abuse in their
childhoods before 1897 Freud had tended to believe them that year
he changed tack Freud.
EAN moment was deciding that the abuses patients reported wasn't actually real.
Instead it was all fantasies brought on by repressing sexuality in their
childhood. And here is where we get to yet another controversial segment.
Nowadays it's acknowledged that children experience immature sexual feelings,
usually in the form of embarrassing crushes or really,
really wanting to hold Chloe's hands during recess.
But we also acknowledge that some adults really do abuse children,
even adults from respectable middle class families as far from certain,
but some argue Freud unwiting.
He helped cover up a culture of abuse in Vienna saw the breakthrough gave Freud
the notoriety that he always craved. Now,
we just had to convince the deeply conservative society he lived in to take his
wild thoughts on sexuality seriously and well, how hard could that be?
Well, we will see,
but first I want to take a quick moment to tell you about today's sponsor,
brilliant, who make this video possible. Brilliant. Believe that learning math,
science and computer science doesn't have to be dull. And to that end,
they've put together courses that are all about storytelling,
interactive challenges and solving problems.
It's this hands on approach to learning.
That's really an excellent way to learn. And currently on their website,
they've got over 50 inter active courses. And look,
you're halfway through a video about a very famous person in science.
So you're probably already the curious type and brilliant can be a great way to
take that curiosity a step further and understand the world even more.
For example, there's a course on scientific thinking,
which allows you to get a solid foundation in physics while just doing a few
puzzles. Like I said, it's a great way to learn.
You'll get to understand physics of things like mirror reflections,
laser attack,
who doesn't love that and a whole lot more so effective learning is all about
problem solving and brilliant help you learn and practice. Just that.
It's a great compliment to videos like this side.
It's all good to learn something here,
but why not take it a step further with brilliant?
So if you wanna support biographics,
which would be fantastic and unlimited access to all of brilliance in depth,
maths and science courses, you can head over to
brilliant.org/biographics and get 20% off their annual premium subscription.
And let's go back to Freud.
If the 1890s were Freud's Wilder years,
the first decade of the 20th century was Freud marching in from the desert,
kicking down the gates of Vienna and forcing the world to listen to his
ideas. In 1900,
the interpretation of dreams hit the bookshelves with all of the force of a bomb
going off.
The basic outline of Freud's thesis was linking dreams with repressed desire,
often stemming from childhood, while also talking about fantasy and daydreams,
reflecting unconscious once. If that sounds a little abstract,
know that this book is where the idea of the EDUs complex comes from something
that we still talk about over a century later,
but the most consequential parts was Freud's insistence that his discoveries
didn't just apply to his patients. They were universal.
This great oath of dark was railing away in all of us.
It was this insight that would ensure Freud's name went down in history,
starting in 1902 Freud followed up the book with regular lectures at Vienna
university. Although the number of attendees was small.
There was a core and loyal group before along that group was meeting with Freud
every Wednesday to discuss psychoanalysis by 1908,
they would grow into the hugely influential Vienna psychoanalytic society.
As these meetings began to spread Freud's ideas,
the man himself was hard at work churning out book after book first came the
pathology of everyday life, which introduced the world to Freudian slips,
disappointingly, not a Lacey undergarment. You were to seduce your mother,
but the act of accidentally saying something revealing.
This was followed in 1905 by fragments of an analysis of a case of hysteria,
which first diagnosed the phenomenon of transference.
It was around this time that Freud's growing fame,
brought him into contact with Carl Young to say young was important to Freud's.
Life is like saying the civil war probably affected Abraham Lincoln's career,
their collaboration.
It was intense and tragic intense because their meetings which turn into nonstop
13 hour debates and tragic because, well,
you'll see a little bit later in Yung Freud's saw someone who could make
psychoanalysis mainstream because young was 20 years younger,
but also because he was a Gentile, he may have been an atheist all his life,
but Freud was only too aware of how Europe saw even non observant Jews.
This meant that his discoveries could be pigeonholed as mirror Jewish crackery
for several years,
the collaboration spurred both Freud and young to even greater Heights.
Young was there when Freud held the first psycho a Congress in Salberg.
He was there when Freud gave his only lecture series in America at Clark
university, Massachusetts.
And he was there defending Freud in the public eye whenever his ideas were
ridiculed, but a last,
it was not a last in 1913 resentments that had been building between the two
men. They finally came exploding out.
There are many theories about what caused their rift, but given today's subject,
it seems only fitting to highlight one, particularly Freudian interpretation.
We know that Freud occasionally fretted, that he had a gay side. Indeed.
He claims that all humans were innately bisexual and that he may have harbored
repressed feelings for young.
We also know that young had unresolved anger issues relating to his father
feelings. He often directed to Ward's father figures like Freud,
whatever the truth, the break between the two men, it was permanence in 1913.
Freud wrote the younger man,
a letter telling him he never wanted to see him again.
Young seems to have agreed, and he never tried to contact Freud. Again,
it was the end of an intense period of creativity for Freud and the end of his
dreams of grooming a success app.
But that time period was also the end of something else too.
Fraud didn't know it, but he was living through the last days of Europe.
The first world war was like a wrecking ball crashing into the house of cards,
marked history. In the short years, between 1914 and 1918,
the horse swept away three whole empires, including Austria, Hungary come late.
1918 Vienna had gone from being a seat of European power to the backwater
capital of a small impoverished nation known simply as Austria for Freud.
The war had been marked by the constant threat of tragedy,
both personal and professional. On the personal side,
all three of his sons had been drafted to serve in the O Hungarian army,
making the death of at least one of them seem almost inevitable.
On the professional side,
the outbreak of war killed the international psychoanalysis movement.
Stone debt for four long years, Freud was confined to Vienna,
able to do nothing, but right think and dream of a better future.
It was during this period that the lifelong cigar smoker first discovered a
strange growth on his jaw. Yet Freud was lucky.
All three of his sons came back alive from the front.
And when the war ended in 1918 and the economy of Austria was battered by
runaway inflation Freud was able to take British clans to provide his family
with hard currency for the lifelong Anglophile Freud.
This was a dream come true.
His patients were the famous Bloomsbury set a collection of free thinking,
right? As an artist,
when they came to him for treatment Freud made it a condition that they
translate his works into English.
It was this agreement that would eventually make Freud a household name yet.
It was also into this postwar period that tragedy finally struck in 1919,
a virent new strain of flu. We, it swept the world known as Spanish flu.
It remains one of the deadliest pandemics in history. In one short year,
it killed up to 50 million people among that 50 million was Freud's daughter.
Sophie. The death of Sophie came as a devastating blow to Freud.
Barely had he recovered from this.
When he himself was diagnosed with cancer of the draw,
it was this start of a long decline from which Freud would never recover.
But life goes on as the great war gave wage in the roaring twenties Freud
continued to write publishing the ego and the IDs.
The work that gave us times like super ego that are still used today.
He also began to focus on his daughter and as development,
taking her to psychiatric conferences and increasingly sending her in his place
when the cancer left him too weak,
it was around this time when Freud was at his lowest E that psychoanalysis
really began to take off in Paris.
These surrealists founded an entire art movement inspired by Freud's discoveries
in Vienna Freud found himself suddenly treating the fabulously wealthy like
Marie Bonna party, descendant of Napoleon. By the end of the twenties,
you could even convince yourself that Freud's life was getting back on track the
cancer killin.
He was publishing books like civilization and its discontents and psychoanalysis
was taking off in America. But sadly,
we already know that this was just an illusion from a vantage point of the 21st
century. We can already see the clouds gathering on the horizon.
The storm that will be unleashed by a nationalist with a fanatical hatred for
Jews, for the Jewish Freud, still living in Vienna.
That storm would be destined to consume him
On may the 10th, 1933,
a large group of students gathered outside the state operate Berlin,
but these students were aren't there to down kegs or party.
They were there to burn books belly two months earlier,
the German parliament had passed the enabling act,
handing total power to add off Hitler. Now the Nazi student groups,
they were showing their enthusiasm for the new regime by consigning 25,000
Urman books to the flames among the books that were burned that day were the
works of Sigman Freud in Vienna.
Freud could only watch his neighboring Germany felt Nazi.
His soul consolation may have been that Austria hadn't yet succumbed.
Although fascists seizes control of the country in 1934,
they stopped short of the outright EMM of the Nazis.
Still the growing violence in Germany. It must have put everyone on edge.
People must have been thinking well,
what if Hitler decided to take over Austria? And in 1938, as you know,
he did just that on March the 12th German tanks rolled across the border
annexing, Austria into the third rock on the streets of Vienna.
People lined up to cheer. The Nazis buildings were draped in stickers.
Street parties were held all alone in his apartment.
Freud simply noted two words in his diary, Finn Austria by this stage,
Freud was nearly dead from the cancer that had spread throughout his system.
He was a walking cadaver that couldn't even make it to the family summer house
outside of Vienna. When people suggested he'd leave the country,
he told them it would never happen nor would have had it not been for what
happened to Anna on March the 22nd, Anna Freud was arrested by the gustapo.
They ruthlessly interrogated her for hours before throwing her back out onto the
street.
The incident shook the elderly Freud to his core and the next day he decided to
leave Austria. But this, it was easier said than done under the new Nazi regime.
The whereabouts of Jews were closely tracked the,
even the country required a special exit visa.
And you can guess how often the Gustavo handed those out.
Thankfully Freud had three very important people on his side.
The first was his patient Marie Bonna apart. The second was William bull.
The us ambassador in Vienna.
The third was less expected Kaar Anden Saral was, uh, died in the world,
Nazi tasked with overseeing Jews in that,
but Saal was also a former student of one of Freud's closest friends.
He had spent all of his years of study learning to respect the famous doctor.
So when he discovered Freud was looking for an out,
he decided to help him that spring Saral secured exit visas for Freud in 16 of
his family members elsewhere,
princess Murray was using her vast fortune to grease as many palms as possible.
While William bull was applying diplomatic pressure. After three months,
the Freud were finally given the all clear to leave Austria for England.
The rides of London must have been both hopeful and heartbreaking here was Freud
finally fulfilling his teenage dreams to live in England.
But under the gloomiest of circumstances,
it probably didn't help that all four of Freud's elderly sisters had been unable
to get exit via. Although Freud wouldn't live long enough to hear the news.
All four would perish in concentration camps on the 6th of June,
1938 Freud and his family finally arrived in London by train worded,
leaked out into huge crowd,
had gathered to welcome the world's most famous psychoanalyst.
As he saw the rose upon rows of people, cheering,
Freud felt like it finally come home.
Freud would live belly a year after reaching England's passing away on September
the 23rd, 1939, just 20 days after Britain declared war on Germany.
He kept receiving patients almost until the very ends when the author HG Wells
came to visit Freud confided in him that it had always been a fantasy of his to
be an Englishman in hiss own strange way that fantasy had come true today.
It's fashionable to knock Freud's theories to poke fun at his experiments with
cocaine and his obsession with sex.
Certainly there are few psychiatrists today who would say that Freud's methods
were completely sound yet just focus on Freud's medical work is to miss the
point, no matter what you think of him,
Freud completely transforms the way we understood the human mind.
Just think about how often you hear of people having complexes or suffering from
transference or having problems with mother or father figures.
Think how deeply the ideas of psychoanalyst and childhood trauma of perpetrated
into our,
our fiction into our art think just of how significant surrealism became
SI. Freud may have died exile unloved by his home country,
but he also died the father of psychoanalysis and the greatest Explorer of
the human mind for that reason, if for no other, he deserves to be remembered.
So I really hope he found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up bottom below.
Don't forget to subscribe either and hit the notification bell. Possibly.
The best thing you could do though,
is support this channel by supporting our sponsor. Brilliant,
who I'm also linking to below and as always thank you for watching.
<Silence>.